Technical review: Add WebAuthn Signal API (#37557)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/api/web_authentication_api/index.md

5. Once verified by the server, the authentication flow is considered successful.

> ### Discoverable credentials and conditional mediation

Reviewer: This is very welcome addition, but I don't understand how it works - what is autofilled into the login forms and where does it come from? What is the flow once a credential is selected? What is it that the RP server now stores associated with a user? What is the challenge signed with? How does the RP associate a user with the selected credential info?

Ultimately how does the RP verify the user?

What would really help would be a version of https://pr37557.content.dev.mdn.mozit.cloud/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Authentication_API#authenticating_a_user that covers the case for discovered credentials.

Note, one problem with this ^^^ is that it is abstracted from the login process for the user. I.e. in step one we already have the RP signing a challenge for a user. But what key does it use? How does it know which credential to use? What does the user see when they click the sign in button? Essentially what is the flow that flow that leads to the RP being able to sign the challenge.

But anyhow ...

As I understand it for the _server_ case :
- The RP stores a credential, which is a public key (associated with a public/private key pair on the authenticator) and associated user data. My assumption is that authenticator uses the public key to identify its corresponding private key.
- When the user (as above, no idea how it knows which one) wants to log in the web app sends the credential (public key) to the authenticator along with a challenge.
- The authenticator signs the challenge with the private key associated with the public key, and returns it to the browser, which gets it to the RP.
- The RP then confirms that the challenge is what it sent out, and that it is signed with the private key associated with the credential. If so, the authenticator in possession of this user is authorized, and the RP can sign the user in.

But what happens in the discoverable credential case? The RP doesn't have the credential to sign the challenge as those are on the authenticator. What does it get back that it can use to verify that this user has something that allows them to access this particular account?

Reviewer 2: > My assumption is that authenticator uses the public key to identify its corresponding private key.

It's the credential id that the authenticator uses to identify the correct private key.

> But what happens in the discoverable credential case? The RP doesn't have the credential to sign the challenge as those are on the authenticator - or are they also on the server. What does it get back that it can use to verify that this user has something that allows them to access this particular account?

The flow is not fundamentally different:
* RP prepares a challenge for the authenticator to sign.
* RP makes a request with an empty allow list.
* The browser prompts the user to select a credential, or to insert a security key that may have credential for the site.
  * Since the allow-list is empty, only discoverable credentials can be shown.
* The user selects a credential.
* The browser tells the authenticator to sign the challenge with the credential selected.
* The authenticator signs the challenge with the private key of the credential selected.
* The RP gets the signed response and the credential ID.
* The RP verifies that the challenge in the signed data matches the challenge it generated earlier.
* The RP verifies that it has a matching credential ID for the user and looks up its corresponding public key in its database.
* The RP verifies the signature against that public key.

The [relying party operations](https://w3c.github.io/webauthn/#sctn-rp-operations) section of the spec has more details.

Reviewer 2: > The difference is that the info in the authenticator can be used to populate login forms. Is that correct, @nsatragno, and are you able to help us with some of @hamishwillee's confusion?

Yes, this is correct. If mediation is conditional, then the list of passkeys is presented on the autofill popup box instead of a modal dialog. Conditional mediation also forbids an allow list that is non-empty. This means that with conditional mediation, _only discoverable credentials may be used_.

The other difference is that the browser doesn't report errors to the relying party, e.g. if the user cancels. Instead, it quietly restarts the request.

Everything else, including how to validate the assertions, stays the same.

Reviewer 2: (Note that all of these should really be documented on MDN, just not on the signal API section!)

Reviewer: Thanks so much @nsatragno (& @chrisdavidmills) - I understand and "believe" this now :-). This helped so much.

The key part I was missing was that the RP stores the credential id and public key in all cases - so it can still supply a challenge and validate the challenge. The difference from the original flow is that the RP doesn't tell the authenticator what credentials to offer or what credential to use -the authenticator supplies the list it knows about.

@chrisdavidmills I'm not going to try update this in line with the above, but I think you need to - because now that I understand this, I can still see why I was confused. It says nothing incorrect, but it isn't clear that the server still holds and supplies the same information it always did - it just doesn't make the decision about what credentials the user is offered.

One thing to capture is what the the meaning/relationship between the terms "discoverable credential" and "conditional mediation".  The first sentence is immediately very technical, and perhaps you want to capture in overview by comparing to non-discoverable credentials - i.e. Non discoverable do this, discoverable do this, they are the same except instead of supplying the credentials to the authenticator to use .... I.e. what does "discoverable mean".

I don't think you need to show the whole steps as I suggested before (and Nina did for us), but you could note that they are exactly the same except in terms of how the credentials presented to the user are selected (ie. the credential are not specified, but the credential id of the credential supplied by the user is returned along with the challenge etc - so that the mapping is clear.)

Anyway, have a think - we can bounce ideas in slack if you want.

Author: OK, I've considered all the points above, and given this section a pretty decent overhaul. Let me know if you think it needs anything else.

And thanks again @nsatragno for all the help, this has been super valuable.

> A **discoverable credential** is one where the relying party server does not provide credential IDs. Instead, the credential IDs are stored in and provided by a client-side authenticator of some kind such as a browser password manager, authenticator app, or hardware solution such as a YubiKey.

Reviewer 2: > A **discoverable credential** is one where the relying party server does not provide credential IDs.

This is not accurate. A discoverable credential is one that stores enough information in the authenticator that the relying party does not _have_ to provide a credential ID when asserting it. It is possible to assert a discoverable credential by passing a credential ID just like you'd do for a non-discoverable credential. 

Discoverable credentials store secrets and metadata such as the user's `name` and `displayName` so that the browser can help the user pick a credential when signing in. Also, the RP never provides credential IDs during registration (it's not clear if this is what you meant, just clarifying).

Author: Thanks for the clarification here, that's really useful. In my next commit, I've rewritten that section, considering this. Please have another read and let me know if you think my updates are OK.

[Passkeys](https://passkeys.dev/) are a significant use case for discoverable credentials; see [Create a passkey for passwordless logins](https://web.dev/articles/passkey-registration) and [Sign in with a passkey through form autofill](https://web.dev/articles/passkey-form-autofill) for implementation details. See also [Discoverable credentials deep dive](https://web.dev/articles/webauthn-discoverable-credentials) for more general information on discoverable credentials.

When conditional mediation is used for authentication, the prevent silent access flag (see {{domxref("CredentialsContainer.preventSilentAccess()")}}) is treated as being `true` regardless of its actual value: the conditional behavior always involves user mediation of some sort if applicable credentials are discovered.

> [!NOTE]
> If no credentials are discovered, the non-modal dialog will not be visible, and the user agent can prompt the user to take action in a way that depends on the type of credential (for example, to insert a device containing credentials).

> 

Reviewer: Good to mention the new methods here, preceded by a sentence like.

> It is possible for the information stored in a user's authenticator about a [discoverable credential](https://pr37557.content.dev.mdn.mozit.cloud/en-US/docs/Web/API/Web_Authentication_API#discoverable_credentials_and_conditional_mediation) (for example, [a passkey](https://passkeys.dev/)) to go out sync with the relying party's server. This can occur when the user updates their user name or display name on the relying party's site without updating the authenticator, if the X, Y, Z ...

Author: added

When conditional mediation is used for authentication, the prevent silent access flag (see {{domxref("CredentialsContainer.preventSilentAccess()")}}) is treated as being `true` regardless of its actual value: the conditional behavior always involves user mediation of some sort if applicable credentials are discovered.

> [!NOTE]
> If no credentials are discovered, the non-modal dialog will not be visible, and the user agent can prompt the user to take action in a way that depends on the type of credential (for example, to insert a device containing credentials).

It is possible for the information stored in a user's authenticator about a discoverable credential to go out sync with the relying party's server. The API provides methods to allow the relying party server to signal changes to the authenticator, so it can update its stored credentials:

- {{domxref("PublicKeyCredential.signalAllAcceptedCredentials_static", "PublicKeyCredential.signalAllAcceptedCredentials()")}}
- {{domxref("PublicKeyCredential.signalCurrentUserDetails_static", "PublicKeyCredential.signalCurrentUserDetails()")}}

> - {{domxref("PublicKeyCredential.signalUnknownCredential_static", "PublicKeyCredential.signalUnknownCredential()")}}

Reviewer: This is where I thought we should have the comparative info about the methods, and where you use each.

Author: Yup, cool, added!

5. Once verified by the server, the authentication flow is considered successful.

### Discoverable credentials and conditional mediation

A **discoverable credential** is one that is supplied by an authenticator to the browser to offer to the user as a login option. In contrast, a non-discoverable credential is one that the relying party site tells the browser to offer as a login option.

> Discoverable credential `credentialId`s and associated metadata such as [user names](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredentialCreationOptions#name_2) and [display names](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredentialCreationOptions#displayname) are stored in a client-side authenticator such as a browser password manager, authenticator app, or hardware solution such as a YubiKey. Having this information available in the authenticator means that the relying party does not have to provide a [`credentialId`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredentialRequestOptions#id) when asserting it, although it can do if desired in the same way as you would for a non-discoverable credential.

Reviewer: This is accurate but it might be good to capture why using data on an authenticator is useful. I think it is because the authenticator is a full representation of the user and their credentials - the user literally has to enter nothing because its all on the key. Without this, you at least have to supply some user id so that the RP knows what credentials to send the  authenticator.

Note I tried several ways to do this. Not so easy. 

> although it can do if desired in the same way as you would for a non-discoverable credential.

What I think this means is that you can use a discoverable credential as a non-discoverable credential - but of course you'll get the modal API.
I think you should spell that out, as you might assume from this that if you supply a discoverable credential id in this way it might somehow still be discoverable.

Author: I thought about this quite a bit, and ended up changing the last sentence to 

> Having this information available in the authenticator means that the user can log in conventiently without having to supply credentials, and the relying party does not have to provide a [`credentialId`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredentialRequestOptions#id) when asserting it (although it can do if desired).

We already talk about the modal UI versus log in form later on, and I didn't think the "in the same way as you would for a non-discoverable credential" detail was very useful. Less said about it the better?

Reviewer: @chrisdavidmills Not sure. When you say " (although it can do if desired) that doesn't tell me that this discoverable credential is no longer being discovered. I think it worth spelling that out.

YOu might instead say (if the credential is asserted by the RP then the non-discoverable workflow is followed).

Author: OK, that makes sense. I've actually edited the parenthetical to say both.

> A discoverable credential is created via a [`create()`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/CredentialsContainer/create) call with a specified [`residentKey`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredentialCreationOptions#residentkey), and then subsequently used for authentication via a [`get()`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/CredentialsContainer/get) call with **conditional mediation** specified, that is, [`mediation`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/CredentialsContainer/get#mediation) set to `conditional` and an empty [`allowCredentials`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredentialRequestOptions#allowcredentials) list. The `credentialId` is used by the authenticator to identify the correct private key during authentication.

Reviewer: This reads more like the non-discoverable -  "The `credentialId` is used by the authenticator to identify the correct private key during authentication." is wrong - the authenticator isn't being told what key to use here.

Would be good to make it clear that the user info is stored in both places. Thats a key part of this.

This might not quite work with the rest of the flow once it is inserted, so will need adjustment. But it will be something like this.

```suggestion
A discoverable credential is created via a [`create()`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/CredentialsContainer/create) call with a specified [`residentKey`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredentialCreationOptions#residentkey).
The credential Id and public key for the new credential is returned to the web app, and stored on the RP server along with the associated user information.

In order to authenticate, the RP server calls [`get()`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/CredentialsContainer/get) with **conditional mediation** specified, that is [`mediation`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/CredentialsContainer/get#mediation) set to `conditional`, an empty [`allowCredentials`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredentialRequestOptions#allowcredentials) list, and a challenge.
The browser offers the user an auto-filled login form with all the discovered credentials on the authenticator. 
Once a credential is selected the authenticator uses it to sign the challenge with the associated private key, and the browser returns the signed challenge and its credential id to the browser.

The authentication process in the RP server is then the same as for non-discoverable credentials.
```

Author: OK, I've had a go at rewriting this in my next commit, keeping what you've said above in mind.

You can check whether conditional mediation is available on a specific user agent by calling the {{domxref("PublicKeyCredential.isConditionalMediationAvailable()")}} method.

Conditional mediation results in discoverable credentials found in the authenticator being presented to the user in a non-modal UI along with an indication of the origin requesting credentials, rather than a modal dialog. In practice, this means autofilling available credentials in your login forms. The metadata stored in discoverable credentials can be displayed to help users choose a credential when logging in. To display discoverable credentials in your login forms, you also need to include [`autocomplete="webauthn"`](/en-US/docs/Web/HTML/Attributes/autocomplete#webauthn) on your form fields.

The sign-in flow for discoverable credentials is very similar to that of non-discoverable credentials, except that:

> 1. The [`allowCredentials`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredentialRequestOptions#allowcredentials) list included in the associated `get()` call must be empty, meaning only discoverable credentials can be shown. To reiterate, the relying party doesn't tell the authenticator what credentials to offer to the user — instead, the authenticator supplies the list it has available.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The [`allowCredentials`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredentialRequestOptions#allowcredentials) list included in the associated `get()` call must be empty, meaning only discoverable credentials can be shown. To reiterate, the relying party doesn't tell the authenticator what credentials to offer to the user — instead, the authenticator supplies the list it has available, and returns the credential id of the selected credential and signed challenge for validation.
```

Author: I've included this stuff differently now, due to the changes earlier. Let me know what you think.

> [!NOTE]
> If no credentials are discovered, the non-modal dialog will not be visible, and the user agent can prompt the user to take action in a way that depends on the type of credential (for example, to insert a device containing credentials).

#### Discoverable credential synchronization methods

It is possible for the information stored in a user's authenticator about a discoverable credential to go out sync with the relying party's server. The API provides methods to allow the relying party server to signal changes to the authenticator, so it can update its stored credentials:

- {{domxref("PublicKeyCredential.signalAllAcceptedCredentials_static", "PublicKeyCredential.signalAllAcceptedCredentials()")}}
- {{domxref("PublicKeyCredential.signalCurrentUserDetails_static", "PublicKeyCredential.signalCurrentUserDetails()")}}
- {{domxref("PublicKeyCredential.signalUnknownCredential_static", "PublicKeyCredential.signalUnknownCredential()")}}

> It may seem like `signalUnknownCredential()` and {{domxref("PublicKeyCredential.signalAllAcceptedCredentials_static", "signalAllAcceptedCredentials()")}} have similar purposes, so what situation should each one be used in?

Reviewer: At this point it won't seem anything, because the users can't guess what the above methods do from their names particularly.
Further, the explanation of their difference doesn't make sense if you don't know why the credential ids might be out of sync - i.e. deletion of an id on server but not authenticator.

I would probably fix this by after "It is possible for the information stored in a user's authenticator about a discoverable credential to go out sync with the relying party's server. " adding a line "This might happens if user details associated with a credential are modified on the RP server, or if the credential is deleted"

Maybe an emdash after each method explaining what case it deals with.

Just some thoughts.

Author: Done, and done. I've also restructured the section a little to make it flow better. Let me know what you think.

5. Once verified by the server, the authentication flow is considered successful.

### Discoverable credentials and conditional mediation

A **discoverable credential** is one that is supplied by an authenticator to the browser to offer to the user as a login option. In contrast, a non-discoverable credential is one that the relying party site tells the browser to offer as a login option.

> Discoverable credential `credentialId`s and associated metadata such as [user names](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredentialCreationOptions#name_2) and [display names](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredentialCreationOptions#displayname) are stored in a client-side authenticator such as a browser password manager, authenticator app, or hardware solution such as a YubiKey. Having this information available in the authenticator means that the user can log in conveniently without having to supply credentials, and the relying party does not have to provide a [`credentialId`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredentialRequestOptions#id) when asserting it (although it can do if desired; if the credential is asserted by the RP then the non-discoverable workflow is followed).

Reviewer: FWIW I do think that all of this could be a little easier to digest starting with the use case "Conditional mediation and discoverable credentials are WebAuthn concepts used in workflows where the credentials that are offered to the user are discovered from the authenticator (instead than being supplied by the RP server). The user doesn't even have to enter their user id in order to log in: they just need to select from the credentials on the authenticator.

But what is here is clear and we could mess with this kind of detail all day. So consider this a ramble.

Author: This is a little rambly, but there are some good suggestions here, and I've improved the opening paragraph as a result.

The API provides methods to allow the relying party server to signal changes to the authenticator, so it can update its stored credentials:

- {{domxref("PublicKeyCredential.signalAllAcceptedCredentials_static", "PublicKeyCredential.signalAllAcceptedCredentials()")}}: Signals to the authenticator all of the valid credential IDs that the RP server still holds for a particular user.
- {{domxref("PublicKeyCredential.signalCurrentUserDetails_static", "PublicKeyCredential.signalCurrentUserDetails()")}}: Signals to the authenticator that a particular user has updated their user name and/or display name on the RP server.
- {{domxref("PublicKeyCredential.signalUnknownCredential_static", "PublicKeyCredential.signalUnknownCredential()")}}: Signals to the authenticator that a credential ID was not recognized by the RP server.

It may seem like `signalUnknownCredential()` and `signalAllAcceptedCredentials()` have similar purposes, so what situation should each one be used in?

> - `signalAllAcceptedCredentials()` should be called in cases where the user _is_ authenticated. It should be called after every successful sign-in, and when the user is logged in and you want to update the state of their credentials.
> - `signalUnknownCredential()` should be called to update the authenticator when the user _is not_ authenticated. It only passes a single `credentialId` to the authenticator — the same one the client just tried to authenticate with. Using `signalAllAcceptedCredentials()` for this purpose would share the entire list of `credentialId`s for a given user with an unauthenticated party, which may not be desirable.

Reviewer: I think this is more instructional/easier to parse.

```suggestion
- `signalAllAcceptedCredentials()` should be called after every successful sign-in, and when the user is logged in and you want to update the state of their credentials.
  It must only be called when a user is authenticated, as it shares the entire list of `credentialId`s for a given user.
  This would be a privacy leak if the user is not authenticated. 
- `signalUnknownCredential()` should be called after an unsuccessful login, to signal the authenticator that the `credentialId` the selected credential cannot be validated, and should be removed. 
  The method can safely be called even when the user _is not_ authenticated as it passes a single `credentialId` to the authenticator and no user information.
```

Author: Yeah, this is pretty good. I've used it, with a few tweaks and fixes.

A **discoverable credential** is one that is supplied by an authenticator to the browser to offer to the user as a login option. In contrast, a non-discoverable credential is one that the relying party site tells the browser to offer as a login option.

> Discoverable credential `credentialId`s and associated metadata such as [user names](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredentialCreationOptions#name_2) and [display names](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredentialCreationOptions#displayname) are stored in a client-side authenticator such as a browser password manager, authenticator app, or hardware solution such as a YubiKey. Having this information available in the authenticator means that the user can log in conventiently without having to supply credentials, and the relying party does not have to provide a [`credentialId`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredentialRequestOptions#id) when asserting it (although it can do if desired).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Discoverable credential `credentialId`s and associated metadata such as [user names](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredentialCreationOptions#name_2) and [display names](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredentialCreationOptions#displayname) are stored in a client-side authenticator such as a browser password manager, authenticator app, or hardware solution such as a YubiKey. Having this information available in the authenticator means that the user can log in conveniently without having to supply credentials, and the relying party does not have to provide a [`credentialId`](/en-US/docs/Web/API/PublicKeyCredentialRequestOptions#id) when asserting it (although it can do if desired).
```

The API provides methods to allow the relying party server to signal changes to the authenticator, so it can update its stored credentials:

- {{domxref("PublicKeyCredential.signalAllAcceptedCredentials_static", "PublicKeyCredential.signalAllAcceptedCredentials()")}}: Signals to the authenticator all of the valid credential IDs that the RP server still holds for a particular user.
- {{domxref("PublicKeyCredential.signalCurrentUserDetails_static", "PublicKeyCredential.signalCurrentUserDetails()")}}: Signals to the authenticator that a particular user has updated their user name and/or display name on the RP server.
- {{domxref("PublicKeyCredential.signalUnknownCredential_static", "PublicKeyCredential.signalUnknownCredential()")}}: Signals to the authenticator that a credential ID was not recognized by the RP server.

It may seem like `signalUnknownCredential()` and `signalAllAcceptedCredentials()` have similar purposes, so what situation should each one be used in?

> - `signalAllAcceptedCredentials()` should be used in cases where the user is authenticated and you want to update the state of a user's credentials.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `signalAllAcceptedCredentials()` should be when the user is authenticated. It should be called after every sign-in, and when the user is logged in and you want to update the state of a user's credentials.
```

Author: I have updated this, but with a few tweaks to both bullets to make them consistent.

Reviewer: Good, I was going to propose something like

```suggestion
- `signalUnknownCredential()` is used to remove a single credential on the authenticator that was selected by the user during login (but is not present on the RP server). It is safe to use when the user has not authenticated as it passes the single invalid `credentialId` to the authenticator and no other information. 
```

And append this information to the preceding one. Something like 

> -  `signalAllAcceptedCredentials()` should be called after every sign-in (to make sure that all credentials are synchronized), and when you know that the signed in user has updated their credentials on the RP web app. I should only can be used when the user is authenticated as it shares the entire list of `credentialId`s for a given user, which is privacy information that should not be shared with an unauthenticated party.
